foreign
so today I'm going to talk about
exoplanets in the first 500 light years
or region nearby the Sun and to really
understand this we have to go back to
look first at how we might detect
planets around other stars
the first and most obvious method is by
directly photographing them and this was
first done using a device called a
coronagraph this is where you put a
small metallic disc in the optical path
of your telescope and block out the
light of a star in the hope that you can
then reveal the much much fainter Planet
that's adjacent to it so the disc
blocking the Starlight is this black
disc in the center here supported by the
two metal struts and you can see some of
the Stray Starlights that is diffracting
around it as the White and the blue
regions and the planet is revealed at
the bottom there and that was 2003 the
planet is beta pictoris a b was the
first planet to be orbit directly imaged
uh using a telescope
previous attempts had relied on more
indirect methods
in particular astrometry where you
measure the position of a star against
the background of the sky and look to
see how it changes over time year on
year
the nearby stars at least can be seen to
move across the sky it's called their
proper motion and they change their
position slowly against the background
of the rest of the much more distant
Stars those stars are of course moving
but they're so far away we hardly notice
but the nearby ones exhibit this proper
motion
and if that proper motion doesn't carry
them in a straight line it creates a
wiggly path as shown in the bottom
picture there then perhaps the reason
for the wiggle is a the gravitational
disturbance of an unseen companion so a
planet
and really what's happening is that the
planet and the star are orbiting their
Common Center of mass rather than
the planet just orbiting the star and
the star staying still and so if you
have a large enough planets of a small
enough star then this might be
detectable
and Peter Van de Camp famous Dutch
astronomer tried this and he chose very
wisely he chose Barnard's star just six
light years away from the Sun very
nearby
um and
it appears to have quite High proper
motion it moves across the sky very
quickly
now it's also a very small star a red
dwarf star and so the perturbation
caused by any large planet would be
potentially detectable
and he indeed measured the position of
this star tracking it across the sky for
many years and announced that he had
seen a wobble and claimed the first
discovery of an extra Solar Planet or
exoplanets as we would call it now and
this Wiggly Trace
that runs from 1950 up to 1975 25 years
of observations is indeed his data
showing that back and forth sinusoidal
motion of the parent star indicative of
quite a large companion and the orbital
period of the companion can be worked
out by looking at the period of the sine
wave and it looks like about 10 or 11
years
so a similar orbital period to that of
Jupiter
now nobody else was able to repeat this
and eventually it turned out that what
had happened was that around about the
early 1960s an event had occurred
um repeated another 10 or so years later
and that was that the engineers came
along and did telescope maintenance 1962
they took the scope apart and put it
back together and they didn't get it
aligned exactly
uh the same setup and again 10 years
later 1972 so the apparent 10-year
period was really an artifact that that
was the engineering cycle on the scope
and really what we're seeing here is a
little bit of random wobble
um in instrument noise and measurement
error around what is essentially a
straight line
however the twist in the tale for this
story is that
in 2018
very Planet orbiting round Barnard's
star was detected so there is a planet
Barnard B and it's uh not the one that
uh Van de Camp thought he'd found though
this one is a super Earth 3.2 times the
mass of the Earth
um and orbiting round in just 233 days
so very similar to the orbital period of
Venus in our solar system but at the
corresponding distance for that 233 days
bearing in mind that the red dwarf star
Barnard star only outputs a tiny
fraction of the amount of heat that our
sun does this planet would be a very
very chilly minus
170 degrees C
um so really not habitable
nevertheless very interesting to see
that uh the even this little red dwarf
star has quite a large planet around it
another method that can indirectly
determine the existence of planets is
that radial velocity method so here
again we're looking for the wobble of
the star caused by its companion planets
but we're not using the position of the
star we're actually using the shift in
the colors in the Spectrum caused by the
Doppler effect so if the star is
wobbling around and moving towards us
then the light gets shifted to the blue
end of the spectrum as the waves are
compressed if it's moving away it
stretches them out into the redder end
of the spectrum
we could detect that looking at the
lines in the Spectrum and seeing them
move back and forth and so you get a
wiggly sinusoidal graph of the velocity
of a star which of course relates to the
deflection caused by the Unseen
companion Planet going around it and you
can work out the same sorts of things to
do with the orbital period And even an
estimate perhaps of the mass of the
planets
um if you do this
and then very famously the first
detection was 51 Pegasi b
um a hot Jupiter planet so a planet
probably a gas giant planet like Jupiter
very large
orbiting around in a very close orbit
around the star 51 peg this was the
first radial velocity detection and
showed that solar systems out there
don't all look like ours this one had a
giant planet in a close in orbit very
much a surprise
they orbit is only 4.2 days long and the
temperature that closed in puts this
Jupiter at about a thousand degrees
um so very very hot indeed
moving forward to 2004 we have 55 can
try e was detected and it's e because
there was a b a c and a d so there were
four planets detected in this solar
system but 55 can cry e was is what's
called a super Earth
so a terrestrial type Planet but larger
more massive than the earth
um this one is about eight times the
mass of the Earth and double the
diameter and uh it is however fairly
close into its star and gets rather
toasty again from the the Heat
so um
not necessarily in the habitable zone of
its parent star but a very interesting
World in its own right
another method that was then started to
be used was the transit method this is
where we look for the dimming of the
Starlight rather than a change of color
or the movements the spectral lines or
the change of position of the star we
look in this case for its brightness
dropping because one of its planets
passes in front partially eclipsing The
Starlight
um and the picture on the right is the
planet Venus the black dot at the bottom
partially blocking parts of the Sun in
2004 as it transited across the face of
the Sun so whilst it did that a little
bit less sunlight was received on Earth
and the Sun would have measured as
slightly dimmer and if we do that for
stars
then we can detect the passing in front
of planets now of course the line of
sight has to be right if the planet was
orbiting around the star in such a way
that it doesn't cross that line of sight
we wouldn't see anything
um and to this end the Kepler space
telescope was launched and it stared up
at a patch of Sky just off the
constellation of cygnus
um looking at the brightness of 150 000
stars for about five years
and during that time it saw enough of
them dim to make uh 3
000 planetary detections
we've got a scatter map of the locations
of them on the grid that it looked at
um colored in here blue for earth-sized
yellow for super Earths orange for
Neptune sized and red for giant planets
and you can see they are sort of pretty
much scattered around at random all over
the uh the area there now the
interesting thing is that in order for
this method to work you have to have the
alignment just right so that the planet
blocks some Starlight and the chance of
that is about 1 in 50 if you do the
maths
but 3 000 detections out of 150 000
Stars
is one in fifty it's two percent
um and this suggests to us that uh we
found as many planets as we would expect
to find only if all stars had planets if
fewer than All Stars had planets we
would have found fewer than three
thousand so we're very much convinced by
this argument that it's highly likely
that all stars
seem to have at least one planet and in
many cases a whole family of them that's
quite a revelation really
now one of them that I discovered
was uh using the Kepler space telescope
goes by the name
kic914-7029 b for the first planet
discovered around that star with that
catalog number and this is the data this
Wiggly uh spotted graph here it's going
up forwards in time left to right and
suddenly the brightness which is the
measurement we're taking here dropped as
the planets passed in front of the star
now the star is 157 light years away
it's 80 percent the mass of our sun so
it's slightly less massive but it's a
bit older and a bit hotter because it's
a little bit more evolved but what we
detected was that every 397 and a half
days so 13 months we get one of these
dips in the Starlight as the planet
moves in front
um and so a planet's now being promoted
to being Kepler objects of Interest koi
5626b
um there is the star itself and the
planet dipping the light
now with the star being 200 degrees C
hotter than the sun
that little bit of extra distance that
corresponds to a 13-month orbit puts
this planet slap bang in the habitable
zone and this was one of the very first
detections of a planet in the habitable
zone of its star
of course
the planet itself we can work out the
size of it because with a diameter of 84
000 kilometers a super Neptune or a mini
Saturn sized planet
um blocks about three percent of the
light of the uh star
um if it blocked more as a percentage
then it must have been a bigger planet
and so on
2007 we found a habitable planet
in the habitable zone a super Earth
rather than a gas giant for the first
time and this is glisa 581c
um an artist's impression here
um and the gliesa solar system
has a red dwarf star
um and then a whole string of planets b
c d e f and g in the order of Discovery
um and they are nicely positioned so
that g is slap bang in the middle of the
temperature zone for liquid water to
exist the so-called Goldilocks zone or
habitable zone of the star
um that Goldilocks zone is much closer
to gliese 581 then it is in our solar
system because the star is that much
cooler so the optimum position is about
10 times closer into the star to get the
right temperature but Planet G is nicely
in that zone and in fact C probably a
little bit too hot like Venus and d a
little bit too cool like Mars but D is a
larger Planet so might have a thick
atmosphere to keep it a little bit
warmer we don't know that yet
now the first detection of a
habitable
Zone planet
where the star was not a red dwarf star
but was a sun-like star came in 2011
with Kepler-22b and this is a super
Earth planet again it's about double the
radius of the Earth eight times the mass
and it's in an orbit that takes 290 days
so a shorter closer orbit than the earth
so it's likely to be really quite warm
because there's going to be large
amounts of volatile gases and liquid
water probably on the surface water
vapor in the atmosphere and that thick
atmosphere will create a greenhouse
effect
so uh Kepler 22b is probably on the
inner edge of habitability might turn
out to be rather too hot as shown in
this diagram here with the solar system
and there's kepler-22 system
2014 we found the first actual
earth-sized planet in the habitable zone
of our parent star so here it's not a
super Earth it's
um just 1.1 times the Earth diameter
um and it's going around a 130 day orbit
around a star that is cooler than the
Sun and the temperature is very much the
sort of habitable temperature this is
Kepler 186f
we've got a super Earth discovered here
kepler-452b
um about one and a half times the radius
of the Earth so a little bit on the
large side probably got a very thick
atmosphere but again in the habitable
zone
um of a sun-like star so uh gradually
homing in on more and more Earth-like
worlds 2015 next year 2016 we've got a
the discovery of Proxima Centurion being
this really interesting Proxima Century
the nearest star to the sun just 4.2
light years away
um and it was found to have a star
uh sorry a planet orbiting around it and
that's in a 11.2 day orbit so just 1
20th of the distance of the Earth to the
Sun but Proxima the star is a very very
feeble Red Dwarf so this puts it in the
habitable zone the mass of the planet is
just 130 percent that of Earth so very
slightly larger
um
and uh
overall very very Earth-like indeed
you can see a comparison here to the
solar system with the sun and Proxima
centuries of all red dwarf star with
Proxima B and the Earth to the same
scale and here's Jupiter and Saturn you
can see Proxima is only a little bit
larger than Jupiter in fact you'd need
to take 75 Jupiters and pack them
together to create the mess of uh the
smallest Red Dwarf star so Jupiter is a
bit of a failed Star by quite some large
margin it would need to be a lot larger
now one of the issues as regards Proxima
B actually having life on it could be
that red dwarf stars like Proxima are a
bit unruly towards the beginning of
their life uh they have a lot of flare
activity and that drives the habitable
zone further away from them
and maybe within 200 million years or so
the star settles down and the habitable
zone moves nearer and so perhaps Proxima
Centauri be the planet would have been
rather toasted had its atmosphere
Stripped Away during that first 200
million years
um now I'm not sure I buy this argument
because
uh on Earth
the hedian era that first 500 million
years of the Earth's existence
the Earth was a radioactive wall of
molten lava and didn't have much by the
way of an ocean on it and we think that
the water must have been delivered later
by the impact of comets and asteroids
and these would gradually have added to
the oceans of the earth and uh built
them up
about that 500 million year cooldown
period for the planet is a bit longer
than the stabilization time needed for
the red dwarf star to calm down here so
um I don't think it really matters that
the star was a bit Rowdy because the
planet wasn't remotely capable of
retaining any water anyway during that
first period
we found another planet Proxima C this
is a larger super Earth or mini Neptune
seven times the mass of uh our Earth in
an orbit that is uh 50 further away from
the Star than the earth is and that uh
that's going to be pretty chilly at
about uh just 40 degrees above absolute
zero so uh very cold indeed and we think
it might have a ring system that's been
drawn in this artist's impression here
but here's some of the basic facts
discovered in 2020 seven Earth masses
takes 5.2 years to go around minus 234
degrees C and there's a direct image of
it there and tentatively we think that
there might be this ring system so maybe
it's like a mini Saturn
and further out again
there is Proxima D this has not been
confirmed but there's another potential
planet in that system so we're beginning
to find that there's quite an
interesting little solar system right on
our doorstep and some of these planets
are going to be announced
um and Then followed up by the James
Webb Space Telescope
in 2017 the trappist-1 system was
discovered
um this was uh found to have a whole
host of planets so b c d e f g and H so
we're talking seven planets here aren't
we
um quite a solar system indeed and all
of them similar in size to the Earth
some a little larger some a little
smaller
um and this is a little bit further away
from the Sun but it's nevertheless one
that we're going to be able to study in
great detail with uh instruments as they
come online
the one thing that we mustn't forget
with planets like uh the one that I
discovered is that giant planets tend to
have moons and so the fact that I found
a giant planet in the habitable zone of
a star would suggest that if it had any
uh family of moons that those moons
themselves would be in the habitable
zone carried around in orbits by their
host giant planet and uh that would be
very interesting indeed and so the
search is on to see if we can track down
moons of planets around other stars and
the first one that's probably been found
Kepler
1625b it's shown in an artist's
illustration here we've got a
neptune-sized moon orbiting a Jupiter
times 10
planets so a super Jupiter with a
neptune-sized moon going around it and
of course we're going to detect the
largest examples of these first in the
same way that we first detected some of
the large hot Jupiter planets because
they were the easiest to find
following up with the Hubble telescope
we've already been looking at some of
the Kepler discoveries and found that K2
18b
um
Orbit's a red dwarf star it's a super
Earth planet
round about the right amount of energy
arriving from the parent Star 94 the
solar heating that we get
um so it would have a temperature
naked if it had no atmosphere of
somewhere between -8 and plus 5 degrees
C but with an atmosphere that's going to
boost that up and the Hubble Space
Telescope has discovered that it's got a
thick water atmosphere and so water
being an excellent greenhouse gas is
going to bring that surface temperature
well up and be very interesting to see
if we can actually measure that so that
was really just a Whistle Stop tour of
some of the most interesting uh
exoplanets in and around the
neighborhood of our sun I hope you've
enjoyed that do click the Subscribe
button if you get the chance and do look
at some of the other videos that we've
got available for you to enjoy
thanks a lot